Marco Aurelio Menezes
Data Engineer
Location: São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil | Phone: +55 31 997778827 | Email: marcoaurelioreislima@gmail.com
LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/in/marco-menezes-731542b9 Portfolio: http://github.com/marcoaureliomenezes
SUMMARY
Senior Data Engineer – DE with over 8 years of experience in Python programming language, 4 years of work
experience, designing and implementing data pipelines related with Big Data workloads, using Python, Spark,
Hadoop Ecosystem, and SQL for validations. Over 2 years migrating data pipelines and systems from on-premises
to Cloud - Azure + Databricks. Since this year responsible for migrating Accounting streaming data pipelines to
AWS. Background in Control and Automation Engineering studies. Known for the expertise in Python, Spark and
big data fundamentals with a passion about sharing knowledge. Proven ability to integrate DE concepts with new
tools and frameworks, as technology evolves, always balancing purpose, performance, costs and other trade-offs.
SKILLS
Proficient: Python, SQL, Spark, Linux, Cloud Migration, Purpose-driven, Communication and Decision-Making.
Intermediate: Java, Scala, PostgreSQL and Aurora, Scylla, DynamoDB, and Redis databases, Apache Kafka,
Airflow and Iceberg, AWS & Azure DE related services, Databricks, DE team Leadership and Development life
cycles using Agile and CI/CD methodologies and tools such as Jira, Git, Jenkins and Service Now.
Beginner: Apache Flink and Machine Learning algorithms.
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE
Senior Data Engineer
F1rst Digital Services – Santander Brazil, São Carlos – São Paulo, BR
02/2024 to Present
Core Responsibilities:
 Responsible for conducting the DE accounting team through the Data Transformation strategic movement;
 The Data Transformation consists of migrating batch and streaming data pipelines from on-premises to
Cloud, adapting them to a Data Mesh and Medallion Architecture design;
 Migration pipelines from on-premises to the Azure using Databricks, Data Factory and ADLS gen2.
 Migration of streaming data pipelines from DB2, Kafka, Spark Streaming, ScyllaDB and Openshift to
AWS using the resources DB2, Kafka, Amazon MSK and MSK connectors, Aurora and EKS.
 Design of new daily batch data pipelines using Azure and Databricks to deliver Bronze and Silver
Accounting Delta tables to our Data Domain, named Cash Management;
Key Technologies and Tools: Spark, Hadoop, Hive, Databricks, Azure Data Factory and Data Lake Storage, and
AWS services such as Amazon MSK, Aurora, EKS, S3 and CloudWatch.
Mid-level Data Engineer
F1rst Digital Services – Santander Brazil, São Carlos – São Paulo, BR
07/2022 to 02/2024
Core Responsibilities:
 Responsible for conducting the Cloud migration for the Operational Discontinuity Plan system;
 The system must increase durability of Analytical big data tables by copying partition of daily and monthly
Hive tables to a secondary Hadoop cluster located 100 Km far away;
 As the sources were migrated to Azure, the system evolved to copy Delta Tables located in different data
domains data lakes, and stored using Local Redundancy using Cool / Hot tiers configuration to a Zone
Redundancy Storage using the archive tier, therefore improving durability and reducing storage costs;
 Due to the nature of the system, with high volume and sensitive data, big challenges related to governance,
compliance, and security were overcome, demanding assertive communication and purpose-driven skills;
Key Technologies and Tools: Python, Spark, Shell-Script, Hadoop Ecosystem, Databricks, and Azure Cloud;Junior Data Engineer
F1rst Digital Services – Santander Brazil, São Carlos – São Paulo, BR
05/2021 to 07/2022
Core Responsibilities:
 Design, implementation and maintenance of data pipelines related to big data workloads for reporting;
 Data delivery for regulatory purposes ensuring bank financial healthy and law compliance.
 In June 2022 certified as Advanced Data Engineer by Santander Brazil, ranking among the top 10 data
engineers in the institution, after passing a test and presenting a technical case to data experts.
Key Technologies and Tools: Python, Spark, SQL, Hadoop, Hive, Hue, Shell-Script
Junior Data Engineer
Trie Engineering, Belo Horizonte, BR – Remote
10/2020 to 05/2021
Core Responsibilities:
 Maintenance of low-volume data pipelines fed by Google Spreadsheats and field data;
 Provide dashboard data feeds to support decision-making for stakeholders in the Cement Industry.
Key Technologies and Tools: Python, Pandas and Numpy.
Scholarship recipient
Fire labs, Federal University of Ouro Preto, BR
08/2016 to 08/2017
 Development of embedded software to control a gas oven equipment using data from temperature and gas
flow sensors to control a gas valve and a AC motor to inject air in the system to follow a curve temperature.
Key Technologies and Tools: C, Arduino, Control Systems design.
Summer Internship
Analógica Instrumentation and Control, Belo Horizonte, BR
01/2015 to 02/2015
 Development of an application to extract data from fuel tank sensors and ingest it for downstream apps.
 First work experience with Python.
Key Technologies and Tools: Python and Raspberry PI.
EDUCATION
Bachelor of Control And Automation Engineering
Federal University of Ouro Preto, Minas Gerais, Brazil
08/2018
 Relevant coursework: Electronics, embedded systems, control systems design, C and Python.
 Bachelor Thesis: Analysis of the Dynamics and Design of Temperature Controllers for Electric Showers.
CERTIFICATES
Santander Brazil Data Master Program – Data Engineer Advanced
Databricks - Data Engineer Associate
Microsoft Azure - Data Engineer Associate – DP-203
AWS - Data Engineer Associate – DEA-C01
Databricks - Apache Spark Developer
Microsoft Azure - AZ-900, DP-900, SC-900 and AI-900
AWS - Cloud Practitioner
Jun/2022
Jun/2023
Ago/2023
Feb/2025
Sep/2024
2023 and 2024
Jul/2024
EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES
•
•
Exchange Student in Stuttgart, Germany from June to December 2019.
Social Projects Director of the Association of Federal Student Housing in Ouro Preto from 2014 to 2017.
LANGUAGES
Portuguese:
English:
German:
Native
Advanced
Intermediate